[master<T0875] Scaling guide (#496)
memgraph/docs: docs/under-the-hood/storage.md

:::tip 
For the latest and most precise memory layout please clone
[Memgraph](https://github.com/memgraph/memgraph) and use, e.g.,
[pahole](https://github.com/PhilArmstrong/pahole-gdb) to discover accurate
information. 
:::

Each `Vertex` and `Edge` object has a pointer to a `Delta` object. The
`Delta` object stores all changes on a certain `Vertex` or `Edge` and that's
why `Vertex` and `Edge` memory usage will be increased by the memory of
the `Delta` objects they are pointing to. If there are few updates, there are
also few `Delta` objects because the latest data is stored in the object.
But, if the database has a lot of concurrent operations, many `Delta` objects
will be created. Of course, the `Delta` objects will be kept in memory as long as
needed, and a bit more, because of the internal GC inefficiencies.

### Delta memory layout

Each `Delta` object has a least **104B**.

### Vertex memory layout

Each `Vertex` object has at least **112B** + **104B** for the `Delta` object, in
total, a minimum of **216B**.

### Edge memory layout

Each `Edge` object has at least **40B** + **104B** for the `Delta` object, in
total, a minimum of **144B**.

> ### `SkipList` memory layout

Author: The issue here is that the term skiplist doesn't exist if it's not written as a code object... it's a skip list.. so I wanted to avoid confusion that SkipList is indeed SkipList... if I were to write this without code style, as a regular word, it should be skip list.. 
So whatever works for majority, but skiplist is not in anyway an ok word :)

> ### `SkipList` memory layout

Author: we can code all the objects

> ### `SkipList` memory layout

Reviewer: aaa now I get it, feel free to choose. 😀

> ### `SkipList` memory layout

Reviewer 2: I would leave the code 😄

> ### `SkipList` memory layout

Author: coded all the objects... have issues with this

> ### Index memory layout
> 
> Each `LabelIndex::Entry` object has exactly **16B**.
> 
> Depending on the actual value stored, each `LabelPropertyIndex::Entry` has at least **72B**.
> 
> Each Index Entry Object is placed into the `SkipList`.

What's the Index Entry Object... how should I capitalize that? Is that also in code as other objects? What object is it?

Each object (`Vertex`, `Edge`) is placed inside a data structure
called a `SkipList`. The `SkipList` has an additional overhead in terms of
`SkipListNode` structure and `next_pointers`. Each `SkipListNode` has an
additional **8B** element overhead and another **8B** for each of the `next_pointers`.

> It is impossible to know the exact size of the **#next_pointers** upfront, but

Author: this is what was bugging me in the notion file as well, but kate answered that this is common to use in math

> It is impossible to know the exact size of the **#next_pointers** upfront, but

Reviewer: Ooo, now that you mentioned it, I guess this should represent like number of next_pointers. Didn't ring a bell at all while I was reading the docs, so not sure is this is the right way to annotate things for the docs .

> It is impossible to know the exact size of the **#next_pointers** upfront, but

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I agree, we should write a number of, instead of # in the documentation. But, this sentence was not clear to me in the Notion too, left a comment [there](https://www.notion.so/memgraph/Scaling-Guide-c02176b4c5384fdda9b4ea4c8a322487#f5409c52daf74e10b25056899a65ee19).

> It is impossible to know the exact size of the **#next_pointers** upfront, but

Author: I will leave it as is for now, and we'll update upon getting more info

> it's never higher than **2 x #objects** because the number of pointers is

Author: this is what was bugging me in the notion file as well, but kate answered that this is common to use in math

> it's never higher than **2 x #objects** because the number of pointers is

Reviewer 2: Again, it is correct, but it would be better to write something like: 
It is impossible to know the exact size of the **#next_pointers** upfront, but it is maximally equal to twice the number of objects because the number of pointers is...

> it's never higher than **2 x #objects** because the number of pointers is

Author: I will leave it as is for now until we know what exactly we are talking about

generated by binomial distribution (take a look at the source code for details).

### Index memory layout

Each `LabelIndex::Entry` object has exactly **16B**.

Depending on the actual value stored, each `LabelPropertyIndex::Entry` has at least **72B**.

Each Index Entry object is placed into the Skiplist.

#### Each index object in total

- `SkipListNode<LabelIndex::Entry>` object has **24B**.
- `SkipListNode<LabelPropertyIndex::Entry>` has at least **80B**.
- Each `SkipListNode` has an additional **16B** because of the **next_pointers**.

### Properties

All properties use at least **1B** for encoding the extra information about the
type of the value stored, the size of the property key (is an integer stored in
1B, 2B, 4B, or 8B), and the last **4bits** are used for a variety of reasons
depending on the value type of the property. After the initial byte, properties

> store the value of its key.

Reviewer: I am confused with this part, this `property key` is not clear to me. @vpavicic we could as Marko (when asking for other stuff) to clarify this a bit more, so maybe we could write it more clearly.

Author: i'm not sure what are you unclear about, which statement?

Reviewer: It is unclear how it can be at least 1B.  If you have 1B  integer property key + 4 bits for something. Than it is always at least 2B.  I do not understand this property key structure, that is why it is unclear. But this is great start, we can be more precise when distributed kicks in.

Author: i understood that encoding the extra info takes up at least 1B?

Reviewer 2: Yep, leave as it is, but property key should be explained more in detail.

> Minimal size without values: **2-9B**

Reviewer: Then here is range without values from 2 to 9 from, we are mentioning "at least 1B" at beginning of previous paragraph.

Author: i guess 1B+ is for for encoding extra info + info about the size of the property key + 4 bits = 2-9

but i can ask for a clarification

Reviewer: That part was bugging me in paragraph above.

Reviewer 2: Clarification from Buda is needed. Fine for now

|`STRING`                               |min 2B                                                  |
|`LIST`                                 |                                                        |
|`MAP`                                  |                                                        |
|`TEMPORAL DATA`                        |8B                                                      |

### Marvel dataset use case

The Marvel dataset consists of `Hero`, `Comic` and `ComicSeries` labels, which are indexed. There are also three label-property indices - on the `name` property of `Hero` and `Comic` vertices, and on the `title` property of `ComicSeries` vertices. The `ComicSeries` vertices also have the `publishYear` property.

 <img src={require('../data/under-the-hood/marvel-dataset-schema.png').default}/>

There are 6487 `Hero` and 12661 `Comic` vertices with the property `name`. That's 19148 vertices in total. To calculate how much storage those vertices and properties occupy, we are going to use the following formula:

$\texttt{NumberOfVertices} \times (\texttt{Vertex} + \texttt{properties} + \texttt{SkipListNode} + \texttt{next\_pointers} + \texttt{Delta}).$

> Let's assume the name on average has $2\text{B}+10\text{B} = 12\text{B}$ (each name is on average 10 characters long). When we include the average values, we get:

Reviewer: @katarinasupe Not sure how you got info about each char size and string in the end but ok, maybe we should check this one with Buda. This things about string can vary a lot, because of encoding support etc..

Reviewer 2: This was Buda's calculation. I only added the calculation for the property `publishYear` that was missing.

The remaining 2584 vertices are the `ComicSeries` vertices with the `title` and `publishYear` properties. The `publishYear` property is a list of integers. The average length of the `publishYear` list is 2.17, so to be sure, we'll say that each list has 3 elements. Since the integer is the year, 2B for each integer will be more than enough. Therefore, each list occupies $3 \times 2\text{B} = 6\text{B}$. We are going to use the same formula as above, we just have to be careful to include both `title` and `publishYear` properties. We can assume that the `title` property is approximately the same length as the `name` property. We have:

$2584 \times (112\text{B} + 12\text{B} + 6\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 104\text{B}) = 2584 \times 266\text{B} = 687344\text{B}.$

In total, $5665824\text{B}$ to store vertices.

The edges don't have any properties on them, so the following formula is:

$\texttt{NumberOfEdges} \times (\texttt{Edge} + \texttt{SkipListNode} + \texttt{next\_pointers} + \texttt{Delta}).$

There are 682943 edges in the Marvel dataset. Hence, we have:

$682943 \times (40\text{B}+16\text{B}+16\text{B}+104\text{B}) = 682943 \times 176\text{B} = 120197968\text{B}.$

> Next, we have label index on `Hero`, `Comic` and `ComicSeries` labels. To calculate how much space they take, we can use the following formula:

Author: ```suggestion
Next, we have label index on `Hero`, `Comic` and `ComicSeries` labels. To calculate how much space they take up, we can use the following formula:
```

$\texttt{NumberOfLabelIndices} \times \texttt{NumberOfVertices} \times (\texttt{SkipListNode<LabelIndex::Entry>} + \texttt{next\_pointers})$

Since there are three label indices, we have the following calculation:

$3 \times 21723 \times (24\text{B}+16\text{B}) = 65169 \times 40\text{B} = 2606760\text{B}.$

For label-property index, we have to take labeled property into account. Property `name` is indexed on `Hero` and `Comic` vertices, while property `title` is indexed on `ComicSeries` vertices. We already assumed that the `title` property is approximately the same length as the `name` property. 

Here is the formula:

$\texttt{NumberOfLabelPropertyIndices} \times \texttt{NumberOfVertices} \times (\texttt{SkipListNode<LabelIndex::Entry>} + \texttt{property} + \texttt{next\_pointers}),$

and when we include the appropriate values, we get:

$3 \times 21723 \times (80\text{B}+12\text{B}+16\text{B})= 65169 \times 108\text{B} = 7038252\text{B}.$

Now let's sum up everything we calculated:

> $5665824\text{B} + 120197968\text{B} + 2606760\text{B} + 7038252\text{B} = 135508804 \text{B} \approx 135\text{MB}.$

Reviewer: @katarinasupe It is nice that you got into 10MB-s range from initial approximations. I like this style of example as demo, but maybe when we go distributed or have extra time, we should rewrite it with something simpler than Marvel, this is a bit complex and lengthy. But overall great effort, and well done! 💪

Reviewer 2: Thanks and I agree it can be done on an even simpler example.

(take a look at [the source
code](https://github.com/memgraph/memgraph/blob/master/src/utils/skip_list.hpp)
for details).

### Index memory layout

Each `LabelIndex::Entry` object has exactly **16B**.

Depending on the actual value stored, each `LabelPropertyIndex::Entry` has at least **72B**.

Objects of both types are placed into the `SkipList`.

#### Each index object in total

- `SkipListNode<LabelIndex::Entry>` object has **24B**.
- `SkipListNode<LabelPropertyIndex::Entry>` has at least **80B**.
- Each `SkipListNode` has an additional **16B** because of the **next_pointers**.

### Properties

All properties use at least **1B** for metadata - type, size of property ID and
the size of payload in the case of `NULL` and `BOOLEAN` values, or size of
payload size indicator (how big is the stored value, for example, integers can
be 1B, 2B 4B or 8b depending on their value). After the initial byte, some
properties (for example, those of `TEMPORAL_DATA` or `STRING` values) store
addition metadata. After metadata, properties store the value. 

#### Size of the additional metadata and value

|Value            |Size                |Note
|-----------------|--------------------|

> |`NULL`           |0B                  | The value is written in the first byte of the metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`NULL`           |1B                  | The value is written in the first byte of the metadata.
```

> |`BOOL`           |0B                  | The value is written in the first byte of the metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`BOOL`           |1B                  | The value is written in the first byte of the metadata.
```

Reviewer: Should `NULL` and `BOOL` be  at least 1B? 1B for metadata? The rest is much more clear now, only Map is missing.

### Marvel dataset use case

The Marvel dataset consists of `Hero`, `Comic` and `ComicSeries` labels, which are indexed. There are also three label-property indices - on the `name` property of `Hero` and `Comic` vertices, and on the `title` property of `ComicSeries` vertices. The `ComicSeries` vertices also have the `publishYear` property.

 <img src={require('../data/under-the-hood/marvel-dataset-schema.png').default}/>

There are 6487 `Hero` and 12661 `Comic` vertices with the property `name`. That's 19148 vertices in total. To calculate how much storage those vertices and properties occupy, we are going to use the following formula:

> $\texttt{NumberOfVertices} \times (\texttt{Vertex} + \texttt{properties} + \texttt{SkipListNode} + \texttt{next\_pointers} + \texttt{Delta}).$

Author: I would actually write the formula like this

Vertex + Delta + Skiplist + pointers + properties

BCS that's how we explain them in the text, that's the order of explanation

Reviewer 2: `Vertex` is placed inside `SkipList` structure that has an overhead in the terms of `SkipListNode` and `next_pointers`.  `Vertex` has a pointer to `Delta` object. I think that the current ordering makes more sense, regardless of the order of explanation.

Let's assume the name on average has $2\text{B}+10\text{B} = 12\text{B}$ (each name is on average 10 characters long). When we include the average values, we get:

> $19148 \times (112\text{B} + 12\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 104\text{B}) = 19148 \times 260\text{B} = 4978480\text{B}.$

Author: I would use the comma to separate the numbers... it's very hard to read like that... 4,978,480

Author: ```suggestion
$19,148 \times (112\text{B} + 12\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 104\text{B}) = 19,148 \times 260\text{B} = 4,978,480\text{B}.$
```

Reviewer 2: Yep, I responded to that in the comment above. Fine by me

> The remaining 2584 vertices are the `ComicSeries` vertices with the `title` and `publishYear` properties. The `publishYear` property is a list of integers. The average length of the `publishYear` list is 2.17, so to be sure, we'll say that each list has 3 elements. Since the integer is the year, 2B for each integer will be more than enough. Therefore, each list occupies $3 \times 2\text{B} = 6\text{B}$. We are going to use the same formula as above, we just have to be careful to include both `title` and `publishYear` properties. We can assume that the `title` property is approximately the same length as the `name` property. We have:

Author: Since the year is an integer, 2B for each integer....?

...we just have to be careful to include both the `title`....

Author: BCS you first mention title then year, but first explain the year, then title

Reviewer 2: If we are going to use the comma (,) in large numbers, then they should be used across the whole document. (that's fine by me) 

Ordering you suggested makes more sense so feel free to change it.

$2584 \times (112\text{B} + 12\text{B} + 6\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 16\text{B} + 104\text{B}) = 2584 \times 266\text{B} = 687344\text{B}.$

In total, $5665824\text{B}$ to store vertices.

> The edges don't have any properties on them, so the following formula is:

Author: , so the formula is as follows:

There are 682943 edges in the Marvel dataset. Hence, we have:

$682943 \times (40\text{B}+16\text{B}+16\text{B}+104\text{B}) = 682943 \times 176\text{B} = 120197968\text{B}.$

Next, we have label index on `Hero`, `Comic` and `ComicSeries` labels. To calculate how much space they take, we can use the following formula:

$\texttt{NumberOfLabelIndices} \times \texttt{NumberOfVertices} \times (\texttt{SkipListNode<LabelIndex::Entry>} + \texttt{next\_pointers})$

Since there are three label indices, we have the following calculation:

$3 \times 21723 \times (24\text{B}+16\text{B}) = 65169 \times 40\text{B} = 2606760\text{B}.$

For label-property index, we have to take labeled property into account. Property `name` is indexed on `Hero` and `Comic` vertices, while property `title` is indexed on `ComicSeries` vertices. We already assumed that the `title` property is approximately the same length as the `name` property. 

Here is the formula:

$\texttt{NumberOfLabelPropertyIndices} \times \texttt{NumberOfVertices} \times (\texttt{SkipListNode<LabelIndex::Entry>} + \texttt{property} + \texttt{next\_pointers}),$

> and when we include the appropriate values, we get:

Author: ```suggestion
When the appropriate values are included, the calculation is:
```
